How can the electron and proton know about each other's charges? How can they interact over a large distance? This is all due to the electric field.

Every charged particle is a source for the electric field. **We denote the electric field with the letter E but it is important not to confuse it with energy**!

## Mattress analogy. 

The electric field is everywhere in space and you can imagine it to be a mattress. Negative charges create dimple in it while positive charges pull the mattress (creating crests). As you put another electric charge on the mattress it will see the dimples and crests and it will be pulled or pushed away. The exact computation of what the electric field is given a distribution of charge can be technical. The concept is that there is an electric field everywhere in space, its value and direction will determine the electric force on electric charges. 

The figure below shows the electric field generated by a positively charged particle like the proton. The lines on the figure are called **field lines** and they point away from the charge if it is positive.

> The electric field is a very real thing that really exists everywhere in space even though you cannot see it. The field line is just a drawing tool we have invented to **represent** the electric field in pictures. 

[ciscode|rev=1|tool=elmsmedia|item=796|entity_type=node|render=display_mode|display_mode=image]

[ciscode|rev=1|tool=elmsmedia|item=797|entity_type=node|render=display_mode|display_mode=image]

If the charge is negative like in the figure above, we get the same shape for the field lines but the arrow is reversed and the electric field now point toward the charge. In the figure below, you can see the electric field lines for a positive and negative charges that are close to each other. This is called a dipole.

[ciscode|rev=1|tool=elmsmedia|item=798|entity_type=node|render=display_mode|display_mode=image]

Here is what you should remember from these figures.

1. The electric field has a direction has shown by the arrows on the field lines.
2. The electric field has a value. The denser the field lines on the figure, the bigger the electric field is. While the more spread out the field lines are, the smaller the value of the electric field is.
3. The electric field is everywhere in space and all charged particles can source it and change it. The electric field has different values at different spacetime points, it is a function of space and time $E(x,t)$

## Phet Simulation

In the following simulation, you can move positive and negative charges to change the "mattress" of the electric field. At each point in space the electric field has a value and a direction. Experiment to get a feeling and help visualize. 

<iframe src="https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/charges-and-fields/latest/charges-and-fields_en.html" width="800" height="600" scrolling="no" allowfullscreen></iframe>